guides/terminal.md, before:

# Working on the Terminal

## Why terminal?

The terminal is essential for:

- Running Git commands to track and share your code
- Installing and managing packages (Python, R, etc.)
- Running scripts and development tools
- Using **Chap**

## What is the Terminal?

The terminal (also called the command line, shell, or CLI) is a text-based interface for interacting with your computer. Instead of clicking icons, you type commands, such as `ls`, which list items in your current directory.

- **Shell**: The program that interprets your commands (e.g., bash, zsh, PowerShell)
- **Terminal**: The window where you type commands
- **Command**: A text instruction like `ls` (list files) or `cd` (change directory)

## How to open/use the Terminal

<details>
  <summary><strong style="font-size: 24px">Windows</strong></summary>

To use Chap CLI on a Windows machine, you need to install the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) and install Chap there. This is because Chap has dependencies on software that is hard to install correctly on a Windows machine.

Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) allows you to run a Linux environment on your Windows machine without the need for a separate virtual machine or dual booting. Read more about WSL [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about).

1. Start **PowerShell** by searching for it in the Start Menu in Windows
   <img src="image.png" alt="PowerShell Start Menu" width="400" />

2. Within the shell, execute:

   ```bash
   wsl --install
   ```

3. Restart your computer

4. Search for and open "Ubuntu" from the Start menu. You now have access to Ubuntu command line, which is a Linux distribution, allowing you to execute Linux commands.

</details>

<details>
  <summary><strong style="font-size: 24px">Mac / Linux</strong></summary>

Open the <strong>Terminal</strong> application.

On macOS, you can find it in
<strong>Applications → Utilities → Terminal</strong>,
or search for "Terminal" using Spotlight (CMD + Space).

#### Installing Homebrew (macOS only)

In the next lesson regarding git and github, you will need the `brew` command. Homebrew ("brew") is a package manager for macOS that makes it easy to install and manage software.

If you don't have Homebrew installed, install it by running:

```bash
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Once Homebrew is installed, you can use the `brew` command to install other software, such as Git or Python.

</details>

### Basic Commands

| Command           | Description                                  |
| ----------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| `pwd`             | Print working directory (show where you are) |
| `ls`              | List files and folders                       |
| `cd <folder>`     | Change directory                             |
| `cd ..`           | Go up one directory                          |
| `mkdir <name>`    | Create a new folder                          |
| `touch <file>`    | Create a new empty file                      |
| `cat <file>`      | Display file contents                        |
| `cp <src> <dest>` | Copy a file                                  |
| `mv <src> <dest>` | Move or rename a file                        |

### Navigation Tips

- Use `Tab` to autocomplete file and folder names
- Use the up/down arrow keys to scroll through previous commands
- Use `Ctrl+C` to cancel a running command
- Use `clear` to clear the terminal screen

## Exercise

Complete these tasks to verify your terminal is working:

### 1. Open your terminal

- **macOS/Linux**: Open Terminal
- **Windows**: Open Ubuntu (WSL)

### 2. Check your location

```bash
pwd
```

**Verify**: You should see a path like `/home/username` or `/Users/username`

### 3. List files

```bash
ls
```

**Verify**: You should see files and folders in your home directory

### 4. Create a test folder

```bash
mkdir terminal_test
cd terminal_test
pwd
```

**Verify**: The path should now end with `terminal_test`

### 5. Create and view a file

```bash
touch hello.txt
ls
```

**Verify**: You should see `hello.txt` listed

### 6. Clean up

```bash
cd ..
rm -r terminal_test
ls
```

**Verify**: The `terminal_test` folder should be gone

If all verifications passed, you're ready for the next guide: [Git and GitHub](git-github.md)

Commit message:

chore: add warning about using rm -r

guides/terminal.md, after:

# Working on the Terminal

## Why terminal?

The terminal is essential for:

- Running Git commands to track and share your code
- Installing and managing packages (Python, R, etc.)
- Running scripts and development tools
- Using **Chap**

## What is the Terminal?

The terminal (also called the command line, shell, or CLI) is a text-based interface for interacting with your computer. Instead of clicking icons, you type commands, such as `ls`, which list items in your current directory.

- **Shell**: The program that interprets your commands (e.g., bash, zsh, PowerShell)
- **Terminal**: The window where you type commands
- **Command**: A text instruction like `ls` (list files) or `cd` (change directory)

## How to open/use the Terminal

<details>
  <summary><strong style="font-size: 24px">Windows</strong></summary>

To use Chap CLI on a Windows machine, you need to install the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) and install Chap there. This is because Chap has dependencies on software that is hard to install correctly on a Windows machine.

Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) allows you to run a Linux environment on your Windows machine without the need for a separate virtual machine or dual booting. Read more about WSL [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about).

1. Start **PowerShell** by searching for it in the Start Menu in Windows
   <img src="image.png" alt="PowerShell Start Menu" width="400" />

2. Within the shell, execute:

   ```bash
   wsl --install
   ```

3. Restart your computer

4. Search for and open "Ubuntu" from the Start menu. You now have access to Ubuntu command line, which is a Linux distribution, allowing you to execute Linux commands.

</details>

<details>
  <summary><strong style="font-size: 24px">Mac / Linux</strong></summary>

Open the <strong>Terminal</strong> application.

On macOS, you can find it in
<strong>Applications → Utilities → Terminal</strong>,
or search for "Terminal" using Spotlight (CMD + Space).

#### Installing Homebrew (macOS only)

In the next lesson regarding git and github, you will need the `brew` command. Homebrew ("brew") is a package manager for macOS that makes it easy to install and manage software.

If you don't have Homebrew installed, install it by running:

```bash
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Once Homebrew is installed, you can use the `brew` command to install other software, such as Git or Python.

</details>

### Basic Commands

| Command           | Description                                  |
| ----------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| `pwd`             | Print working directory (show where you are) |
| `ls`              | List files and folders                       |
| `cd <folder>`     | Change directory                             |
| `cd ..`           | Go up one directory                          |
| `mkdir <name>`    | Create a new folder                          |
| `touch <file>`    | Create a new empty file                      |
| `cat <file>`      | Display file contents                        |
| `cp <src> <dest>` | Copy a file                                  |
| `mv <src> <dest>` | Move or rename a file                        |

### Navigation Tips

- Use `Tab` to autocomplete file and folder names
- Use the up/down arrow keys to scroll through previous commands
- Use `Ctrl+C` to cancel a running command
- Use `clear` to clear the terminal screen

## Exercise

Complete these tasks to verify your terminal is working:

### 1. Open your terminal

- **macOS/Linux**: Open Terminal
- **Windows**: Open Ubuntu (WSL)

### 2. Check your location

```bash
pwd
```

**Verify**: You should see a path like `/home/username` or `/Users/username`

### 3. List files

```bash
ls
```

**Verify**: You should see files and folders in your home directory

### 4. Create a test folder

```bash
mkdir terminal_test
cd terminal_test
pwd
```

**Verify**: The path should now end with `terminal_test`

### 5. Create and view a file

```bash
touch hello.txt
ls
```

**Verify**: You should see `hello.txt` listed

### 6. Clean up

> **⚠️ Warning:**
> The command `rm -r terminal_test` will **permanently delete** the `terminal_test` folder and everything inside it, **without asking for confirmation**. Be very careful when using `rm -r`—double-check the folder name to avoid deleting important files or directories.

```bash
cd ..
rm -r terminal_test
ls
```

**Verify**: The `terminal_test` folder should be gone

If all verifications passed, you're ready for the next guide: [Git and GitHub](git-github.md)
